
i
For additional information about Ohio’s BMV services, 
visit the BMV website at www.bmv.ohio.gov.
ABOUT THIS MANUAL
The Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV) oversees driver and motor 
vehicle licensing and registration among other services. We strive to make 
your experience with the BMV more convenient and efficient. 
The BMV offers the Ohio Driver Manual as a study guide for those needing 
an Ohio Driver License, required by law to drive a motor vehicle in Ohio, 
and sets out guidance on motor vehicle laws. This manual alone may not 
cover all applicable motor vehicle laws. 
The Ohio Driver Manual explains the general process for obtaining a Driver 
License and provides a summary of laws and safe driving practices. The 
manual is not a substitute for, and does not supersede, the Ohio Revised 
Code or the Ohio Administrative Code. The information in this manual is 
subject to change. 
Use the links provided throughout the manual to access additional 
resources.
• Complete the knowledge test
• Schedule a driving test
• Save your place in line at a Deputy Registrar
License Agency
• Renew or reprint your Ohio Driver License or ID Card *
BMV ONLINE SERVICES
*Fees apply
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
ii
SECTION 1: HOW TO GET YOUR DRIVER LICENSE 
Vision Screening and Knowledge Testing .......1
Temporary Instruction Permit Identification
Card (TIPIC) ............................................................2
Driver Education Requirements
(Under Age 21) .......................................................3
Driver Education Requirements
(Temporary Resident Age 21 and Older) ..........3
Motorcycle Ohio....................................................3
SECTION 2: BEFORE YOU DRIVE 
Inspecting Your Vehicle .......................................4
Driver Position: Seat and 
Mirror Adjustments ..............................................5
Safety Restraints ...................................................6
SECTION 3: BE ALERT
Vision ......................................................................7
Fatigue ....................................................................7
Aggressive Driving ...............................................7
Distracted Driving .................................................7
Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving ................................8
SECTION  4: RULES OF THE ROAD 
Speed Limits ..........................................................9
Right-of-Way ........................................................10
Traffic Signals ......................................................10
Traffic Signs .........................................................11
Lane Pavement Markings ..................................13
Two-Way Left Turn Only Lane ..........................14
Crosswalks ...........................................................14
SECTION  5: LEARNING  TO DRIVE 
Starting the Engine .............................................15
Moving the Vehicle .............................................15
Stopping the Vehicle ..........................................15
Steering ................................................................16
Backing Up ...........................................................16
Intersections and Turning .................................16
Roundabouts or Traffic Circles .........................18
Lane Travel ...........................................................18
Changing Lanes ..................................................19
Entering a Multi-Lane Highway ........................19
Exiting a Roadway ..............................................19
Passing .................................................................20
Railroad Crossings ..............................................21
Stopping for a School Bus ................................22
Parking ..................................................................23
SECTION  6: STATE LAWS AND PENALTIES 
Insurance - Financial Responsibility ................24
Alcohol, Drugs, and Driving ..............................24
Penalties ...............................................................26
Riding on the Outside of a Vehicle ...................27
Child Passenger Restraints/Safety Laws ........27
SECTION 7: SPECIAL DRIVING SITUATIONS 
Police and Traffic Stops .....................................28
When to Use Headlights ....................................28
Night Driving .......................................................28
Driving in Fog ......................................................29
Winter Driving .....................................................29
Work Zones ..........................................................29
SECTION  8: SAFE DRIVING TIPS
Visual Search .......................................................30
Speed Management ...........................................30
Space Management ...........................................31
Communicating ..................................................32
Preventing Injury from Hot Vehicles ...............33
SECTION  9: SHARING THE ROAD 
Pedestrians ..........................................................34
Motorcyclists .......................................................34
Bicyclists ...............................................................35
Commercial Vehicles .........................................36
Emergency Vehicles
(Police, Fire, Medical Vehicles) .........................38
Move Over Laws .................................................38
Slow Moving Vehicles ........................................38
SECTION 10: EMERGENCY SITUATIONS 
Avoiding Crashes ................................................39
Vehicle Malfunctions ..........................................40
In the Event of a Crash .......................................41
SECTION  11: TAKING THE DRIVING TEST 
Maneuverability and On-Road
Skills Testing ........................................................42
Abbreviated Adult Driver Training Course .....44
SECTION 12: PURCHASE YOUR DRIVER LICENSE 
Purchasing Your Driver License .......................45
Renewing Your Driver License .........................47
Driver License Classes .......................................47
SECTION  13: WHAT ELSE SHOULD I KNOW? 
New Ohio Residents ...........................................50
Save Our Sight Fund ..........................................50
Organ Donor Registry/Second Chance
Trust Fund ............................................................50
Voter Registration ...............................................50
ID R Kids ...............................................................50
Next 
of Kin – Emergency
Contact Information .............................................51
Living Will Designation ......................................51
Armed Forces Designation ...............................51
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
CONTENTS
1
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
• Read this manual in its entirety 
• Gather proof of identity documents using the Acceptable Documents List
• Study this manual to pass the knowledge test (See Sections 2 through 10)
• Get a Temporary Instruction Permit Identification Card (TIPIC) (See next page)
• Complete a driver education training course and all required driving hours if 
one of the following applies:
– Under age 21
– Temporary resident age 21 and older
• Schedule and pass the driving test (maneuverability and on-road skills tests) 
(See Section 11)
• Purchase your Driver License (See Section 12)
VISION SCREENING AND KNOWLEDGE TESTING
At age 15 years and six months, you meet the minimum age requirement to complete the vision 
screening and knowledge test. 
Vision Screening 
You must meet vision standards before you can get a Driver License. If you wear glasses or contacts, 
bring them with you. Driving restrictions could apply based upon vision screening results. 
Knowledge T esting 
Study and learn all materials in this manual for the knowledge test. Use the online Sample Knowledge 
Test to see how the questions are asked. The test is 40 multiple-choice questions (with a 75% passage 
rate needed) and is available in American Sign Language (ASL), Arabic, Chinese, English, French, 
Haitian Creole, Japanese, Russian, Somali, and Spanish. You may use your own interpreter for all other 
languages by scheduling an appointment at a Driver Exam Station  only. 
• If you pass – Go to a Deputy Registrar License Agency to purchase a Temporary Instruction Permit 
Identification Card (TIPIC) within 60 days of passing the test (see TIPIC information on the next page). 
• If you fail – You must wait one day before retesting. There is no limit on how many times you can take 
the knowledge test, but you can only take it once in a day.
Knowledge Testing is available in the following ways:
• Online through BMV Online Services  (two attempts permitted in a six-month period).                 
• In-person at a BMV Driver Examination Station  (unlimited attempts, one per day).                        
• In-person at select BMV Deputy Registrar License Agencies (unlimited attempts, one per day).
Disability Accommodations:
The BMV understands accommodations may be needed for an individual to complete a knowledge or skills test. 
Accommodations available upon request at the Driver Exam Station include an audio knowledge test, printed 
paper knowledge test, American Sign Language knowledge test, and visual instructions during driving test 
(exclusive to individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing). 
To request accommodations not listed, e-mail the Ohio Department of Public Safety’s ADA Coordinators at 
HRRequestADA@dps.ohio.gov.
IN SECTION 1:
• VISION SCREENING & 
KNOWLEDGE TESTING
• TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION 
PERMIT IDENTIFICATION CARD 
(TIPIC)
• DRIVER EDUCATION 
REQUIREMENTS FOR THOSE 
UNDER AGE 21
•  DRIVER EDUCATION 
REQUIREMENTS FOR 
TEMPORARY RESIDENTS AGE
21 AND OLDER
• MOTORCYCLE OHIO
SECTION 1:  How to Get Y our Driver License
2
TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT IDENTIFICATION CARD (TIPIC) – ORC 4507.05
Once you successfully complete the vision screening and knowledge test, visit a Deputy Registrar 
License Agency within 60 days to purchase a TIPIC. 
• If a TIPIC is not purchased within 60 days, the applicant must start over with the vision screening and 
knowledge test. 
• Applicants must present documents from the Acceptable Documents List  to prove the following 
elements of identity:  
– Full legal name
– Date of birth
– Social Security number (if assigned)
– Citizenship or legal presence 
– Ohio street address (two documents proving address are needed for a federally-compliant card)
• If the applicant is under age 18, the applicant’s parent or guardian must be present to co-sign the TIPIC 
application. 
• If the applicant has an Ohio Identification (ID) card, it will be canceled when the TIPIC is issued. An 
Ohio resident may hold only one Driver License or ID card at a time. 
TIPIC Restrictions
• Under age 16: If under age 16, the driver must have a parent, guardian, custodian, licensed driving 
instructor, or a person age 21 or older, who acts in loco parentis , occupying the front passenger seat 
beside the permit holder. 
• Age 16 to 17: Driving with any valid licensed driver, age 21 or older, in the front passenger seat 
is permitted, except from midnight to 6 a.m. when the driver must be accompanied by a parent, 
guardian, or custodian who holds a valid Driver License.
• Age 18 and over: Practice driving only if accompanied by a licensed driver age 21 or older.
• All ages:
– Drivers must carry the TIPIC at all times when driving.
– The eligible adult in the front passenger seat shall not be intoxicated.
– The driver and all passengers must wear safety belts. 
– Use of any mobile electronic device is prohibited while driving.
– Total number of occupants in the vehicle cannot exceed the total number of safety belts installed in 
the vehicle.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 1: How to Get Y our License
3
DRIVER EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS (UNDER AGE 21)
To obtain a Driver License, a driver under age 21 must meet these requirements:
• Complete a driver education class at a licensed driver training school with 24 hours of classroom or 
online instruction, and 8 hours of driving time. 
• Complete and log 50 hours of driving with an eligible licensed driver (see TIPIC Restrictions on 
previous page), with at least 10 hours of night driving.
• Hold the TIPIC for at least six months. (Applicable to drivers under age 18 ONLY.)
DRIVER EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS (TEMPORARY RESIDENT AGE 21 AND OLDER)
A temporary resident is a person who is not a U.S. citizen or permanent resident under U.S. immigration 
laws, but who does have legal presence in the country.
To obtain a Driver License, a driver that is a temporary resident age 21 or older must meet these 
requirements:
• Complete a driver education class at a licensed driver training school with 24 hours of classroom or 
online instruction, and 8 hours of driving time.
• Complete and log 50 hours of driving with a licensed driver age 21 or older, with at least 10 hours of 
night driving.
• Hold the TIPIC for at least 14 days.
If you are a temporary resident and currently hold an unexpired out of country license from Canada, 
France, Germany, Japan, South Korea or Taiwan, you are exempt from these requirements, and may 
obtain an Ohio driver license by presenting your current license at the time of application.
Find a driving school and additional information at Ohio Driver Training (www.drivertraining.ohio.gov).
MOTORCYCLE OHIO
Obtain a motorcycle license or endorsement by completing a motorcycle skills test at a Driver Exam 
Station or completing the Motorcycle Ohio’s  Basic Riding Skills Course . The Motorcycle Operator Manual
(MOP 0001) provides further guidance to obtain a motorcycle endorsement.
Enroll in a motorcycle training course and
find more information at Motorcycle Ohio (www.motorcycle.ohio.gov).
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
Section 1: How to Get Y our License
4
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
INSPECTING YOUR VEHICLE
When it comes to road safety, you cannot control other drivers or road conditions, 
but you can control your vehicle’s maintenance. Ensure your vehicle is safe for you 
and your passengers before you drive.
Vehicle Equipment Regulations – ORC 4513 and OAC 4501:2-1
Ohio law states: 
“No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any highway 
any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.” 
Additionally, no vehicle is to be equipped with or permitted to have protruding objects, broken sharp 
edges, or vehicle parts that would be dangerous to a person coming in contact with them.
Ohio law also defines the equipment required for vehicles and the conditions that equipment must meet.
The average motor vehicle should have this equipment:
• Steering assembly  that operates normally, with no excessive play in the steering wheel
• Tires with a minimum of 1/16-inch tread depth and no major bumps, bulges, or damage
• At least two seat belts  in the front seat
• Brakes:
– Service brake  that is adequate to slow, stop, and control the vehicle
– Parking brake that is adequate to hold the vehicle on a grade
• Lights:
– Two headlights, one on each side, in working order
– Two red reflectors on the rear of the vehicle, visible from 300 feet
– One taillight that emits red light, visible from 500 feet
– Two red stop lights (brake lights) visible from 500 feet when the brakes are applied
– White light to illuminate the rear license plate, visible from 50 feet
• Turn signals in working order, visible from 300 feet:
– Two at the front of the vehicle
– Two at the rear of the vehicle
• Windshield wipers in good working condition, able to clear precipitation from the windshield
• Rear-view mirror  providing an unobstructed view to the rear of the vehicle
• Horn in good working order, audible from 200 feet, and identifiable as a motor vehicle horn 
• Exhaust system in good working order and constant operation
• Window light transmission  within the acceptable percentages:
– Windshield: 70% light transmission (standard for most new cars)
– Side windows of front seat: 50% light transmission, plus or minus 3%
     Does your vehicle have safety recalls? Search with your vehicle’s Vehicle 
Identification Number (VIN) for recalls at the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA) website: http://www.nhtsa.gov/recalls. 
IN SECTION 2:
• INSPECTING YOUR VEHICLE
-TIRES
-LIGHTS
• DRIVER POSITION: SEAT & 
MIRROR ADJUSTMENTS 
• SAFETY RESTRAINTS
-AIR BAGS
-SAFETY BELTS 
SECTION 2:  Before Y ou Drive
5
Tire Safety
Crashes due to tire maintenance are preventable, and simple steps can save lives. Driving on 
underinflated or overinflated tires or tires with low tread can lead to safety issues on the road.
Tire Inflation:
• Maintain the tires at the vehicle manufacturer’s recommended tire pressure level. The vehicle 
manufacturer’s recommended tire pressure, measured in PSI, is indicated on the door jamb. 
• Check tire pressure when the tires are the same temperature as the surrounding air.
• Remove the cap from the valve stem and use a pressure gauge to check the tire pressure.
• If the number is too low, inflate your tires to the correct level. If the number is too high, release air 
from the tire valve.
Tire Tread Depth —  A tire in safe condition has a minimum of 1/16-inch tread depth on the road surface 
and is free of major bumps or bulges, breaks, or tread damage. A common way to check tire tread depth 
is with a U.S. penny coin. Place the coin with President Abraham Lincoln’s head into the tire’s deepest 
groove. If you see all of the President’s head, your tires are too worn—don’t drive on them, and make 
sure to replace them.
Studded Tires — In Ohio, studded tires are legal from November 1 through April 15.
Know When to Use Y our Lights
Headlights —  Ohio law requires headlights to be on sunset to sunrise, at any time visibility is poor (rain, 
snow, fog, etc.), and any time the windshield wipers are in use because of precipitation. High beam 
headlights can be used at any time headlights are used except when an oncoming vehicle is approaching.
Turn Signals —  Use the turn signals to show intention to turn right or left, to change course of direction, 
or to change lanes on a multi-lane road. Activate a turn signal at least 100 feet prior to changing 
direction.
Hazard Lights —  Use hazard lights to increase visibility of a vehicle stopped on or near a roadway.
DRIVER POSITION: SEAT AND MIRROR ADJUSTMENTS
Adjusting the Driver’s Seat —  Practice good driving posture by sitting upright with 
your back against the seat and feet on the floor. Before driving, adjust the seat to 
have a clear view through the windshield and full control of the vehicle’s 
foot pedals and steering wheel, leaving appropriate space for 
airbag deployment. When your seat is adjusted properly:
• Your foot pivots smoothly from brake to accelerator while 
your heel is kept on the floor.
• The top of the steering wheel is no higher than the top of 
your shoulders and below chin level. 
• There is at least 10 inches between your chest and the 
steering wheel to allow appropriate space for airbag 
deployment. 
• Head restraints are adjusted so the head restraint contacts 
the back of your head and not below the level of your ears, to 
avoid whiplash.
SECTION 2:  Before Y ou Drive
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
6
Adjusting the Mirrors —  Before driving, adjust the mirrors for the best view towards the vehicle’s sides 
and rear.
• Inside rear-view mirror: The rear-view mirror is the primary mirror for the view to the rear. Adjust so 
that it frames the rear window, and traffic flow to the vehicle’s rear appears in the mirror.
• Outside mirrors: Properly adjusted outside mirrors reduce blind spots and provide maximum visibility 
to the side and rear on both sides of the vehicle. Reduce blind spots with these adjustments:
– Left-side mirror: 
 Rest your head against the closed driver-side window 
 Adjust the mirror until the vehicle’s left-edge is barely visible.
– Right-side mirror: 
 Lean to the right so your head is directly above the center console. 
 Adjust the mirror on the right side so that the rear edge of the vehicle can barely be seen. You 
will not see the left and right sides of the vehicle when glancing in the outside mirrors; however, 
this adjustment adds 12 to 16 degrees of additional viewing area to each side of the vehicle. 
Additionally, this allows the vehicle from the rear-view to move into the side-view mirror, and then 
when it leaves the side-view mirror, the vehicle is visible in the peripheral view of the driver. 
SAFETY RESTRAINTS
Air Bags —  Air bags are supplemental restraints and are designed to work best in combination with 
safety belts. In a crash, air bags and safety belts reduce the chance that your head and upper body will 
strike some part of the vehicle interior. Read your vehicle owner’s manual for specific information about 
the air bags in your vehicle.
Safety Belts —  Ohio’s mandatory safety belt usage law requires drivers and front-seat occupants of 
most passenger vehicles to wear safety belts whenever they drive or ride in a motor vehicle on Ohio’s 
roadways. 
Safety belts should be worn even if the vehicle is equipped with air bags. 
Always fasten your safety belt and make sure all passengers are using safety belts or child restraints. 
Drivers and front seat occupants must wear safety belts. For drivers under age 18, the number of vehicle 
occupants is limited to the number of safety belts originally installed and all occupants must wear safety 
belts.
It is important to wear the safety belt correctly:
• The safety belt should be worn across bony 
areas (shoulders and hips).
• A shoulder belt is worn across the shoulder and 
chest with minimal, if any, slack. Do not wear 
the shoulder belt under the arm or behind the 
back. Wearing the belt the wrong way could 
cause serious internal injuries in a crash.
• Adjust the lap belt so that it is snug and lies low 
across your hips after fastening. Otherwise, in a 
crash, you could slide out of the belt, resulting 
in injury or death.
SECTION 2:  Before Y ou Drive
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
7
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
Driving is one of the riskier tasks that you will do during your lifetime. Your ability to 
drive safely depends on good health and making correct decisions.
VISION
Because seeing well is so important to safe driving, have your eyes checked 
regularly by an eye doctor. 
• If you complete the vision screening with corrective lenses, your Driver License 
will indicate a vision restriction and you must always wear your corrective 
lenses when driving.
• Avoid using dark or tinted corrective lenses at night.
For more information about Ohio’s vision standards, refer to
Ohio Administrative Code (OAC) Rule 4501:1-1-20.
https://codes.ohio.gov/ohio-administrative-code/rule-4501:1-1-20
FATIGUE
Fatigue is physical or mental tiredness that can be caused by physical or mental strain, repetitive tasks, 
illness, medications, or lack of sleep. Fatigue can affect your vision and decrease your reaction time.
AGGRESSIVE DRIVING
Aggressive driving occurs when an individual intentionally commits an action that endangers other 
persons or property. Aggressive driving examples are speeding, following too closely, unsafe lane 
changes, improper signaling, and failing to obey traffic signals and warnings signs.
DISTRACTED DRIVING
A distraction is anything that takes attention away from driving, whether it is physically taking your 
hands from the wheel, eyes away from the road, or mental activities that take your mind away from 
driving. Distracted driving can result in crashes causing serious harm to you, passengers, pedestrians, or 
other motorists.
Avoid all types of distraction – cell 
phone conversations, text messaging, 
arguments or emotional conversations with 
passengers, or eating while driving. Make 
sure children and pets are secured properly.
SECTION 3:  Be Alert
IN THIS SECTION:
• VISION
• FATIGUE
• AGGRESSIVE DRIVING
• DISTRACTED DRIVING
• ALCOHOL, DRUGS, & DRIVING
8
In Ohio, it is illegal to drive distracted. This includes using an electronic wireless communication device. 
Drivers Age 18 Years and Older — It is illegal in most cases to use, hold, or physically support a cell phone 
or electronic wireless communications device while driving on Ohio roads. If an officer sees a violation, 
they can pull you over. 
The law allows drivers over 18 years old to make and receive phone calls using “hands-free” technology, 
and use other device features, as long as they do not hold or support the device or manually enter letters, 
numbers, or symbols. Drivers may only activate or deactivate their devices with a single touch or swipe. 
Exceptions Include: 
• Reporting an emergency to law enforcement, a hospital, health care provider, fire department or 
similar emergency entity. 
• Holding a phone to the ear only during phone conversations, if the call is started or stopped with a 
single touch or swipe. 
• Holding or using cell phones or other electronic devices while stopped at a traffic light or parked on a 
road or highway during an emergency or road closure. 
• First responders (law enforcement, fire, EMS) using electronic devices as part of their official duties. 
• Utility workers operating utility vehicles in certain emergency or outage situations. 
• Licensed operators using an amateur radio. 
• Commercial truck drivers using a mobile data terminal. 
The penalties, under the law, have been enhanced.
• 1st offense in two years: 2 points assessed to Driver License, up to a $150 fine. Completion of a 
distracted driving course can help avoid the fine and points.
• 2nd offense in two years:  3 points assessed to Driver License, up to a $250 fine.
• 3rd or more in two years:  4 points assessed to Driver License, up to a $500 fine, possible 90-day 
suspension of Driver License.
• Fines doubled if the violation occurs in a work zone.
Drivers Under Age 18 Years — It is illegal to use any electronic device while driving, even hands-free, or 
while sitting at a traffic light or in a traffic jam.
• Exceptions allow use for navigation device purposes, or emergency services calls. 
• Violation of this law is a ‘primary’ offense (a main cause for a traffic stop):
– First violation: 60-days Driver License suspension and a $150 fine.
– Second violation: 1-year Driver License suspension and a $300 fine. 
ALCOHOL, DRUGS, AND DRIVING 
In Ohio, it is illegal to operate a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs. Even 
legally prescribed or over-the-counter medication may affect an individual’s driving ability.
Effects of Alcohol and Drugs:
• Vision  — May cause blurred vision; reduced ability to focus; and reduced ability to judge distance, 
speed, and the movement of other vehicles
• Reaction Time — Slows your ability to process information and respond to the driving task
• Judgment — Reduces your ability to perceive surroundings and make quick decisions
To further understand the serious consequences of impaired driving,
see Ohio’s crashes and crash injuries on the Ohio State Highway Patrol’s OVI Dashboard.
SECTION 3: Be Alert
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SPEED LIMITS - ORC 4511.21
Speed limits are considered reasonable speeds based on the road’s design, the 
expected traffic volume, and dry weather without fog or other issues further 
affecting visibility. In less-than-ideal conditions (e.g., inclement weather, bad 
road conditions, or high traffic volumes), a reasonable speed may be slower than 
the posted speed limit. A reasonable speed is necessary for a driver to maintain 
control of the vehicle and to bring it to a stop within an assured clear distance 
ahead.
Regardless of the posted speed limit, Ohio law prohibits a person from driving at 
a speed greater than what allows the driver to stop in the distance available.
Generally, speed limits are based on the type of road (two-lane, divided highways, etc.), and the road’s 
location as described in the examples below.
SPEED 
LIMIT ROAD LOCATION / ROAD TYPE
Alleys within a municipal corporation
School Zones during recess and while children are arriving or 
leaving school during normal hours of operation
Streets within a municipal corporation
State routes or through highways, except controlled-access 
highways within municipal corporations outside business districts
State routes within municipal corporations outside urban districts
Freeways with paved shoulders inside municipal corporations
Rural freeways
9
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 4:  Rules of the Road IN SECTION 4:
• SPEED LIMITS
• RIGHT-OF-WAY
• TRAFFIC SIGNALS
• TRAFFIC SIGNS
• LANE PAVEMENT MARKINGS
• TWO-WAY LEFT TURN ONLY 
LANE
• CROSSWALKS
10
RIGHT-OF-WAY
Right-of-way    describes the priority of traffic flow, meaning a pedestrian or vehicle, has the right to 
proceed with precedence over others in a particular situation or place.
For the safety of all, yield the right-of-way to:
• The driver who is at or arrives before you at an intersection.
• Drivers in the opposing traffic lane when you are making a left turn. 
• The driver on your right at a four-way intersection if both of you arrive at the intersection at the same 
time.
• Drivers on a public highway if you are entering the highway from a driveway or a private road.
• Drivers already on a limited access or interstate highway if you are on the entrance or acceleration 
ramp. 
• Pedestrians, bicyclists, and other drivers who are still in the intersection (See Section 9 Sharing the 
Road).
• Public safety vehicles (emergency, police, fire).
• Funeral processions.
TRAFFIC SIGNALS   – ORC 4511.13
Traffic signals are lights that tell you when to stop and go. Traffic lights are usually at intersections and 
are red, yellow, and green from top to bottom. Some locations may have single green, yellow, or red 
lights; or the traffic lights may be horizontal instead of vertical. 
TRAFFIC
LIGHT COLOR TRAFFIC MOVEMENT
RED
A red traffic light means stop before entering the intersection. You 
must wait behind the stop line, crosswalk, or intersection until the 
traffic light turns green.
YELLOW A yellow traffic light indicates the color is about to change to red; 
use caution. Prepare to stop.
GREEN
A green traffic light means you may travel with caution through the 
intersection if it is clear to do so. A light marked with a green arrow 
indicates you can turn in the direction of the arrow without stopping. 
FLASHING
YELLOW
Slow down and proceed with caution. Be prepared to stop for any 
traffic flow that may be entering the intersection.
FLASHING
RED
Stop behind a stop line, crosswalk, or intersection before entering 
and come to a complete stop. Be sure no traffic is traveling across 
your path of travel before entering the intersection.
INOPERABLE 
TRAFFIC LIGHT
Inoperable traffic lights are treated the same as a stop sign. Yield the 
right-of-way and use caution while entering the intersection.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 4: Rules of the Road
11
Prohibitory Signs  instruct the viewer that an action is prohibited. The red circle with a slash represents 
the word ‘NO.’ Whenever this symbol appears on a sign, the illustrated action is prohibited.
 NO LEFT TURN NO U TURN NO RIGHT TURN NO BICYCLES
Regulatory Signs    regulate the movement of traffic. These signs give notice to travelers of traffic laws or 
regulations.
 ALL TRAFFIC IN THIS OBSERVE POSTED SPEED USED AT INTERSECTIONS INDICATES A STOP ONLY IF OTHER
 LANE MUST STOP LIMIT IN SCHOOL ZONE OF ONE-WAY ROADS, ONE-WAY ROAD TRAFFIC IS AFFECTED; 
 BEFORE PROCEEDING DURING RESTRICTED HOURS  & FREEWAY EXIT RAMPS  YIELD TO ALL ONCOMING TRAFFIC
TRAFFIC SIGNS  
Traffic signs indicate traffic rules, hazards, roadway location, roadway directions, and the location of 
roadway services. The shape, color, symbols, and instruction of these signs give clues to the type of 
information they provide.
Warning Signs  tell a driver of possible danger that might be ahead. The signs are usually yellow with 
black lettering or symbols and are diamond shaped.
ROUNDABOUT ROAD CURVES DOWNHILL INTERSECTION AHEAD;  TRAFFIC TRAVELS   
 AHEAD AHEAD GRADE AHEAD TURN LEFT OR RIGHT IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS
 VEHICLE NEAREST THE PASSING BICYCLE CROSSING LIMITED CLEARANCE ROAD BRANCHES 
BRIDGE HAS THE RIGHT OF WAY IS PROHIBITED  AHEAD  AHEAD
  SHARP RIGHT TURN  PEDESTRIAN CROSSING RAILROAD CROSSING    
  AHEAD AHEAD  
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 4: Rules of the Road
12
Guide Signs’  shapes may be square or rectangular, and colors may be green, brown, or blue. These 
signs provide points of interest and services along the highway, information on intersecting roads, and 
help direct drivers to cities and towns. Guide signs can help you find hospitals, gas stations or service 
stations, restaurants, and hotels.
Route Number Signs : The shape and color of these signs indicate the type of roadway — interstate, U.S., 
state, city, county, or local road. Corresponding signs, distances, etc., in maps and GPS applications 
assist travelers in way-finding.
In Work Zones, traffic may be controlled by a person with a 
sign or flag directing traffic. You must follow their instructions. 
Barriers, such as drums and cones, keep traffic from entering closed 
roads or other areas where it is dangerous to drive. Give construction workers 
a “brake.” Be alert, reduce your speed, and be prepared to stop suddenly while 
approaching or traveling through Work Zones. Yield right-of-way to, and maintain a space 
cushion for workers or equipment on the roadway. Maintain a clear distance between your vehicle 
and the vehicle ahead - don’t “tailgate.” Consequences for traveling faster than the posted speed limit 
(“speeding”) in a Work Zone can include doubled fines and jail time.
Work Zone Signs :  These signs generally have a distinctive orange background. Nearing a construction 
zone, be alert, reduce speed, follow the directions of the signs, and watch for workers and equipment on 
the roadway/highway.
     
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 4:  Rules of the Road
13
LANE PAVEMENT MARKINGS
Pavement markings are lines, arrows, words, or symbols painted on the roadway. They divide lanes, tell 
you when you may pass other vehicles, tell you which lanes to use for turns, define pedestrian walkways, 
and show you where you must stop for signs or traffic signals.
WHITE LINES:
Separates traffic 
traveling in the
same direction.
White lines may 
be solid or broken 
(dashed) lines. 
YELLOW SOLID LINE:
Separates traffic traveling
in opposite directions.
YELLOW SOLID DOUBLE LINE:
Do not drive to the left of the 
center line, unless you must cross 
the lines to turn left or pass a 
slow-moving vehicle (e.g., bicycle 
or vehicle displaying a slow-
moving vehicle sign). 
YELLOW SOLID LINE
WITH A BROKEN (DASHED) LINE:
Passing other vehicles is allowed 
for motorists traveling in the lane 
with the broken line.
Passing is prohibited for motorists 
traveling in the lane with the solid 
line.
YELLOW BROKEN (DASHED) LINE:
Vehicles traveling in either 
direction may pass vehicles 
traveling in the same direction 
when safe to do so.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 4: Rules of the Road
14
STOP LINE
STOP LINE
STOP LINE
TWO-WAY LEFT TURN ONLY LANE  
A two-way left turn lane is marked with a broken yellow line and a solid yellow line on each 
side of the lane.  It is also marked with white two-way left-turn lane arrows.
The marked center lane is for left turns only. Vehicles from either direction may use the 
center lane immediately prior to making a left turn. This is not a lane used for traveling or 
passing.
CROSSWALKS
Crosswalks define the area where pedestrians may cross the roadway.
You must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians entering or in a crosswalk. If there is a stop line before the 
crosswalk, the stop line must be obeyed. 
Not all crosswalks are marked in the same way.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 4: Rules of the Road
15
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
STARTING THE ENGINE
Check the vehicle owner’s manual for instructions to start the vehicle. To start 
the engine, place your right foot on the brake pedal and check the gear selector 
for park. Insert the key into the ignition and turn it, or push the Start button. 
MOVING THE VEHICLE
Move the gear selector to “D” (drive). Check forward for a safe path and check 
for traffic to the sides and behind. Signal and if safe, move your foot off the brake 
and to the accelerator and press gently. Accelerate gradually and smoothly with 
the ball of your foot on the pedal and the heel of your foot on the floor.
STOPPING THE VEHICLE
Check your mirrors for traffic to the rear of your vehicle. Move your foot from 
the accelerator to the brake pedal. Press with steady pressure until your vehicle 
comes to a stop. 
The distance it takes to bring a vehicle to a complete stop depends
on several factors: 
• Driver’s reaction time
• Speed at which the vehicle is traveling
• The condition of the vehicle’s brakes
• The condition of the pavement (wet, dry, icy, salted, gravel, etc.)
Allow 3-4 second following distance of the vehicle ahead of you. 
A driver must stop:
• Behind the stop line or crosswalk at any stop 
sign or red traffic signal before entering an 
intersection.
• Behind the stop line or crosswalk at any red 
traffic signal where right or left turns on red are 
permitted. The driver may only proceed with a 
legal turn on red after coming to a full stop and 
yielding the right-of-way to all crossing traffic 
and to all pedestrians crossing the intersection.
• At a flashing red traffic signal, yielding to all 
traffic that does not have to stop.
• At a sidewalk, or if there is no sidewalk, at 
a point prior to entering the roadway, when 
emerging from an alley, driveway, or private 
road in a business or residential district. Drivers 
must yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian on 
the sidewalk.
• Before entering an intersection if there is 
not sufficient space on the other side to 
accommodate the vehicle. The law applies 
whether or not a traffic signal gives a driver the 
right to proceed.
• At the approach of a public safety vehicle (such as a police car, fire engine, or ambulance) 
displaying flashing lights and sounding a warning signal, unless the vehicle is traveling 
in the opposite direction on a divided highway. Move as far as possible to the right of the 
road and remain there until the emergency vehicle has passed.
IN SECTION 5:
• STARTING THE ENGINE
• MOVING & STOPPING THE 
VEHICLE 
• STEERING & BACKING UP
• INTERSECTIONS & TURNING
• ROUNDABOUTS OR TRAFFIC 
CIRCLES
• LANE TRAVEL & CHANGING 
LANES
• ENTERING & EXITING A 
ROADWAY
• PASSING
• RAILROAD CROSSINGS
• STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUSES
• PARKING
SECTION 5:  Learning to Drive
16
STEERING
Turn the steering wheel in the direction you want the vehicle to move, whether moving forward or in 
reverse.
Place both hands on the outside of the steering wheel on opposite sides, at the 4 and 8
o’clock positions , to maintain control of the vehicle and to avoid air bags if they should 
deploy. Your grip on the steering wheel should be firm but gentle. 
BACKING UP
To back up your vehicle safely:
• Check behind your vehicle before you get in. Children and small objects cannot be seen from the 
driver’s seat.
• Place your foot on the brake and shift to reverse.
• Grasp the steering wheel at the 12 o’clock position with your left hand. Place your right arm on the 
back of the passenger seat and look directly through the rear window. Use your mirrors for backing up 
but keep in mind that these mirrors do not show the area immediately behind your vehicle.
• Utilize backup/rear-view cameras, if applicable, but don’t rely solely on the backup/rear-view camera, 
as it may not show the whole area.
• Accelerate gently and smoothly, keeping your speed slow. Your vehicle is much harder to steer while 
you are backing up. Steer slightly in the direction the rear of the vehicle should move. If backing up 
while turning, make quick checks to the front and sides. Continue looking to the rear until coming to a 
complete stop.
INTERSECTIONS AND TURNING
At all intersections, reduce your speed and search for:
• Traffic control devices;
• Oncoming and cross traffic, including motorcycles and bicycles - look left, right, then left again;
• Pedestrians; 
• Roadway conditions; and
• Areas of limited visibility. 
T urns
When turning:
• Signal your intentions.
• Search all corners for traffic controls, pedestrians, other vehicles and so on. 
• Enter and maintain proper position in the lane that is closest to the direction you want to go.
• Look through the turn to the farthest point possible along the intended path.
• Accelerate smoothly to appropriate speed, make sure your turn signal is canceled, and check traffic to 
the rear.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 5: Learning to Drive
17
T urn Signal
A turn signal must be given at least 100 feet before the intended turn. This may be accomplished by 
using either a mechanical signal or the appropriate hand/arm signal.
Right T urns
• Avoid swinging wide to the left before making the turn.
• Always turn right from the right-most portion of your lane into the right-
most portion of the street you’re turning onto.
Left T urns
• When making a left turn, yield to oncoming traffic.
• Always turn left from the left-most portion of your lane into the lane furthest 
left, just to the right of the center dividing line of the street you’re turning 
onto. This pertains to four-lane highways as well.
• When turning left at a green traffic signal, do not proceed into the intersection 
until there is an opportunity to turn. If high traffic volume does not allow an 
opportunity, position the front of the vehicle slightly past the stop bar. Yield to 
pedestrians and oncoming traffic and turn left as soon as it is safe to do so.
Multiple Lane T urning
• Identify and enter the lane from which you will turn.
• Stay in that lane until the turn is completed.
T urning on a Red T raffic Signal
Right Turn on Red — You may turn right at a red traffic signal, unless a sign 
specifically prohibits it . When making a right turn on red, you must come to 
a complete stop and allow all crossing traffic and all pedestrians to clear the 
intersection before you proceed. 
Left Turn on Red — You may turn left at a red traffic signal , only from the 
extreme left lane of a one-way street onto another one-way street, unless the 
intersection has a sign posted forbidding a left turn on red. 
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 5:  Learning to Drive
18
Tips
• At a traffic signal when the light turns green, pause before moving into the intersection. Do not rely on 
other road users to obey traffic signals or signs, as they may not yield the right-of-way. 
• When you encounter a situation where you have a green light, but traffic fills the roadway across the 
intersection, stop prior to the intersection and wait until traffic across the intersection moves forward. 
Do not move into the intersection and stop. Do not block traffic in the intersection.
• When turning onto a road, take the time to make sure your path of travel is clear and there is no 
crossing traffic. You need a large enough gap to get your vehicle across the roadway. You need 
enough space to turn into the appropriate lane and get up to speed. 
• If an approaching vehicle has on its turn signal, do not pull out or turn in front of that vehicle without 
assured proper distance. Do not assume the vehicle is turning. The driver may turn after passing your 
vehicle or may have forgotten to turn off their signal.
• When stopped at a stop sign where you cannot see crossing traffic, edge forward to check for traffic 
before entering the intersection.
ROUNDABOUTS OR TRAFFIC CIRCLES
A roundabout or traffic circle is a circular intersection with design features that promote safe and 
efficient traffic flow. Vehicles travel counterclockwise around a raised center island, with entering traffic 
yielding the right-of-way to circulating traffic. When using roundabouts or traffic circles:
• Upon approaching a roundabout, check for signs regarding your 
travel direction. You cannot change lanes once you are in the 
roundabout.
• Slow down to enter the roundabout or traffic circle.
• Enter a roundabout or traffic circle in a counterclockwise direction. 
• Yield to the traffic already in the roundabout or traffic circle.
• Look to the left for traffic and enter when the lane is clear.
• Once you have entered the roundabout, keep moving. Do not stop 
or change lanes.
• Proceed to the appropriate exit, turn on signal, and exit. 
– Use the 1st exit to turn right.
– Use the 2nd exit to go straight.
– Use the 3rd exit to turn left.
– Use the 4th exit to make a U-turn.
LANE TRAVEL
Drive on the right half of the roadway except when:
• Overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
• Driving on a road divided into three or more marked lanes.
• Driving on a road designed and posted for one-way traffic.
• Otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control device.
• An obstruction makes it necessary for you to drive left-of-center. Yield the right-of-way to oncoming 
traffic.
When driving on a road with four or more lanes, drive in the right lane. Use the lane just right of center to 
pass and make left turns.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 5: Learning to Drive
19
CHANGING LANES
When changing lanes, first ensure the change can be made safely as described below:
• Check your mirrors and “blind spots” or areas around your vehicle that cannot be seen while using the 
rear-view or side-view mirrors, by turning your head and looking over your shoulder in the direction 
you plan to move.
• Identify a gap in traffic, signal, and look again in the direction of the lane change.
• Adjust your speed and steering into the lane.
• Cancel your turn signal.
ENTERING A MULTI-LANE HIGHWAY
Upon entering a freeway, be aware of the vehicle ahead, look over your shoulder in the direction you are 
merging and use your outside mirrors to identify a gap in traffic. Signal and use the acceleration lane to 
reach the speed of other vehicles to merge with the traffic flow. Make sure to cancel your turn signal.
EXITING A ROADWAY
It is important to know where you are exiting the roadway. Plan to move to the lane closest to your 
exiting point early enough to avoid a quick lane change. Maintain your vehicle speed as long as you are 
on the main roadway. Signal your intention, move to the deceleration lane and slow your exiting speed. 
Check the posted speed for the deceleration lane.
If you miss your exit, take the next one. Do not use the opening through the median, which is for use only 
by emergency and public safety vehicles. 
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 5:  Learning to Drive
20
PASSING
How to pass:
• Check for oncoming traffic.
• Check your mirrors and over your shoulder for following or passing vehicles.
• Signal your intentions when it is safe to pass.
• Steer smoothly into the passing lane.
• Maintain or adjust speed as necessary.
• Continue to pass until both headlights of the passed vehicle are visible in the rear-view mirror.
• Signal your intention to return to the lane.
• Steer smoothly into the lane, maintaining or adjusting speed as appropriate.
When being passed:
• Stay in your lane.
• Maintain a constant speed to allow the driver to pass you.
Do not attempt to pass when:
• An oncoming vehicle is approaching. 
• Your view is blocked by a curve or a hill. 
• At intersections.  
• Before a highway-railroad crossing or bridge.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 5: Learning to Drive
21
Multi-Lane, T wo-way Roadway 
Passing is permitted when safe to do so. On multi-lane roads, the left-most lane is intended to be used 
for passing slower vehicles when the pass can be completed without interfering with traffic in either 
direction. Never pass on the shoulder, whether it is paved or not.
Solid Double Y ellow Lines on T wo-lane, T wo-Way Roadway 
Passing is prohibited from both directions when there is a solid double-
yellow line in the center of the road. Crossing the centerline is permitted 
only to turn left into driveways or pass a slow-moving vehicle (e.g., bicycle 
or vehicle displaying a slow-moving vehicle sign) when safe to do so.
Passing Zone on T wo-Lane, T wo-way Roadway 
Passing is prohibited when the solid yellow line is in your lane. You can only pass when the broken 
yellow line is in your lane.
Center T wo-Way Left T urn Lane 
A two-way left turn lane in the center of a multi-lane, two-way roadway is reserved only for left-
turning vehicles in either direction. Special signs and pavement marking arrows are used. This 
lane is not used for passing, merging into traffic, or traveling.
RAILROAD CROSSINGS
A round, yellow warning sign with an “X” symbol and “RR” letters, or a white, 
X-shaped (crossbuck) sign with the text “Railroad Crossing” indicates a highway-
railroad grade crossing. Some crossings are marked with train-activating flashing 
red lights, with or without a gate. These signs caution you to slow down and be 
prepared to stop upon seeing or hearing a train.
Stop no closer than 15 feet and no farther than 50 feet from the crossing when a train is approaching. 
Wait until the train has passed and any warning signals have stopped before crossing the tracks. 
When the crossing is marked with only pavement markings or crossbuck signs, slow down and be 
prepared to stop if you see or hear a train approaching. Do not stop on the tracks and do not attempt to 
cross the tracks when a train is approaching. If the crossing is marked with a stop sign, all vehicles must 
stop before proceeding.
Operators of motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire, school buses, or vehicles 
carrying explosives or flammable liquids, are required to stop at railroad crossings. The 
drivers listen through an open door or window, look in both directions for an approaching 
train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and then proceed with care.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 5:  Learning to Drive
22
STOPPING FOR A SCHOOL BUS – ORC 4511.75
A driver must stop for a school bus when the school bus is dropping off or 
picking up students. When a school bus driver is preparing to stop the bus, 
he or she activates four amber (yellow) warning lights, two on the front and 
two on the rear of the bus. The warning lights continue to flash until the bus 
is fully stopped. Other vehicles are not required to stop during the amber 
flashing lights, but should prepare to stop as soon as the bus comes to a 
full stop. 
When the bus comes to a complete stop, the amber lights stop flashing 
and four red lights—two in front and two in back—start flashing while 
the children enter or leave the bus. In addition, the bus may be equipped 
with a stop arm with flashing red lights that automatically extends beneath 
the window on the left side of the bus. If there is no stop arm, you are still 
required to stop.
• If the bus is stopped on a street or road with fewer than four lanes, all traffic approaching the bus from 
either direction must stop at least 10 feet from the front or rear of the bus and remain stopped until 
the bus begins to move or the bus driver signals motorists to proceed.
• If the bus is stopped on a street or road with four or more lanes, only traffic proceeding in the same 
direction as the bus must stop at the rear of the bus and remain stopped until the bus begins to move.
School bus drivers believing a motorist has unlawfully passed the stopped bus, if possible, will report 
the license plate number and location to the law enforcement agency, who will attempt to determine the 
identity of the driver. 
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 5:  Learning to Drive
23
PARKING
Always park in a designated area. Vehicles must be parked facing the direction of 
traffic on that side of the street, parallel to and not more than 12 inches from the 
right curb. On one-way streets, vehicles may be parked parallel to and not more 
than 12 inches from the right or left curb. Angled parking is marked with lines.
No-Parking Zones / Handicapped Spaces
Check for signs or painted curbs that may prohibit or limit parking. 
Some parking restrictions are indicated by colored curb markings. 
Do not park in spaces marked by a wheelchair symbol reserved for 
people with disabilities, unless you have been issued a disability 
placard or disability license plate. 
Stopping, Parking, or Standing Prohibited - ORC 4511.68
No person shall stop, park, or stand a vehicle in any of the following places, 
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance 
with the directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic control device:
• On a sidewalk;
• In front of a public or private driveway;
• In or within 20 feet of an intersection or crosswalk;
• Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;
• Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
• Alongside a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; or
• At any place where signs prohibit stopping.
A bicycle, electric bicycle, moped, motor scooter (150 cc or less), or micro-mobility device may be parked 
on the sidewalk provided it does not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic.
Parking on  A Hill or Grade
In the event you must park your vehicle on a hill or graded 
surface, turn the front wheels toward the curb-side of the 
road to stabilize the vehicle, shift from “DRIVE” gear to 
“PARK” gear, set the parking brake, and turn the engine off.
36(+05.
A65,
56
7(9205.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 5:  Learning to Drive
24
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
INSURANCE — FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
ORC 4507.212 AND 4 5 0 9.101
In Ohio, it is illegal to drive any motor vehicle without insurance, and it is illegal 
for a vehicle owner to allow anyone else to drive his or her motor vehicle without 
insurance. Drivers who fail to show proof of insurance may have their Driver 
License suspended, fines and reinstatement fees to pay.
Proof of financial responsibility (insurance) must be shown in these instances:
• Whenever law enforcement issues a traffic ticket.
• At all vehicle inspection stops.
• At all Traffic Court appearances.
• When either the driver or vehicle owner is involved in a traffic crash that results in more than $400 in 
property damage.
Minimum liability insurance requirements are:
• $25,000 for injury/death of one person, and
• $50,000 for injury/death of two or more people, and
• $25,000 for property damage in an accident; 
  OR
• Post a personal bond to cover liability at the level above, and
• Establish a $30,000 certificate of deposit with the State Treasurer or file a certificate of 
self-insurance when you own more than 25 motor vehicles.
Drivers who have committed serious traffic offenses, accumulate 12 or more points within a two-year 
period, or crash a motor vehicle without insurance coverage will be asked to file proof with the Bureau 
that they keep high-risk insurance.
When you register your vehicle in Ohio and/or apply for a new, renewal, or duplicate Driver 
License, you will sign a sworn statement that you will not operate a motor vehicle without liability 
insurance or another form of financial responsibility in effect. 
ALCOHOL, DRUGS, AND DRIVING 
Driving while impaired under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs is against the law in Ohio. Even 
prescription or over-the-counter medication may affect an individual’s driving ability.
Effects of Alcohol and Drugs
Vision:  May cause blurred vision; reduced ability to focus; and reduced ability to judge distance, 
speed, and the movement of other vehicles
Reaction time:  Slows your ability to process information and respond to the driving 
task
Judgment:  Reduces your ability to perceive their surroundings and make quick 
decisions
Visit the Ohio State Highway Patrol’s OVI Dashboard for Ohio Statistics.
IN SECTION 6:
• INSURANCE – FINANCIAL 
RESPONSIBILITY
• ALCOHOL, DRUGS, & DRIVING
• PENALTIES
• RIDING ON THE OUTSIDE OF A 
VEHICLE
• CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINT/
SAFETY LAWS
SECTION 6: State Laws and Penalties
25
Alcohol and the Law 
In Ohio, the legal drinking age is 21 years or older and it is against the law to operate a motor vehicle with 
a blood-alcohol concentration (BAC) of:
• .08% or higher at any age 
• .04% or higher for commercial drivers  
• .02% or higher when under the age 21
If an individual is stopped for suspected driving under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol, or physical 
control of a vehicle while under the influence, the officer will conduct sobriety tests and request a 
chemical test to determine the alcohol and/or drug content in the blood. Evidence of impaired driving is 
based on physical findings by the arresting officer and the results of a blood, breath, plasma, or urine 
test. 
Administrative License Suspension (ALS) Test Over the Limit  — If an individual consents to a chemical 
test within two hours of the arrest and the test results show a BAC of .08 or higher, the arresting officer 
confiscates the Driver License and notifies the driver of their suspension. A sworn statement is sent to 
the BMV and a suspension up to five years begins immediately. The individual has the right to have an 
independent chemical test taken at their own expense.
Administrative License Suspension (ALS) Test Refusal   — If an individual refuses to submit to a chemical 
test within two hours of the arrest, the arresting officer will confiscate the Driver License and send a 
sworn statement to the BMV attesting to the refusal. The BMV is then required to impose a suspension 
for a period of one to five years, which starts immediately. The suspension will stand even if the 
individual is ultimately acquitted of the OVI (operating a vehicle while impaired) charge. 
Operating a Vehicle after Underage Alcohol Consumption (OVUAC) (Under age 21)  — An OVUAC can 
result in a license suspension of three months to two years and require the driver to take a remedial 
driving course, pay reinstatement fees, and retake the Driver License examination. The driver may also 
have to serve jail time.
Alcohol and Drug Penalties  — The length of an Administrative License Suspensions (ALS) is determined 
by the number of previous refusals to test or OVI/drug convictions within the prior 10 years:
• ALS — Refusal to Test:
– First Refusal – One year license suspension 
–  One Prior Refusal or OVI/Drug Conviction – Two years license suspension
–  Two Prior Refusals or OVI/Drug Convictions – Three years license suspension
–  Three or More Prior Refusals or OVI/Drug Convictions – Five years license suspension
• ALS — Testing Over the Limit:
–  First Test Over the Limit – Three months (90 days) license suspension
–  One Prior OVI/Drug Conviction – One year license suspension
–  Two Prior OVI/Drug Convictions – Two years license suspension
–  Three or More Prior OVI/Drug Convictions – Three years license suspension
In addition, if an individual is convicted of OVI five or more times in the preceding 20 years of an OVI 
violation, he or she will also have to serve jail time; may be subject to immobilization or forfeiture of his 
or her vehicle; and will be placed on Ohio’s Habitual OVI/OMVI Offender Registry. 
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 6: State Laws and Penalties
26
Impairing Drugs and Driving
Besides alcohol, many other drugs may affect your ability to drive safely. In fact, any substance that 
when taken into the human body can impair the ability of the person to operate a vehicle safely. 
Over-the-Counter Drugs  may affect your ability to drive. Check the warning label or ask your doctor/
pharmacist for any side effects before taking. 
Prescription Drugs  such as antidepressants, pain reducers, sleep aids, and sedatives, have an impact on 
driving safely. Check the prescription warning label or ask your doctor/pharmacist for any side effects 
before taking. 
Illegal Drugs  affect reflexes, judgment, vision, and alertness and should never be used when driving.
Never combine alcohol and other impairing drugs. Drugs may increase the effects of alcohol or have 
additional effects of their own. 
PENALTIES
Point Assessment on Driver License  — Any Ohio driver convicted of a traffic violation is assessed a 
specific number of penalty points according to the type of violation, or subsequent violations. The 
number of penalty points given for traffic violations are assessed by the court system. 
• If a driver accumulates six points within a two-year period, the BMV will send a six-point warning 
letter to the driver.
• If a driver accumulates 12 or more points within a two-year period, the BMV will impose a 12-point 
suspension of the Driver License. To reinstate driving privileges, certain requirements must be met, 
not limited to, completing a remedial driving course, filing an SR-22 bond with the BMV, and paying 
reinstatement fees. 
– An SR-22 is a certificate of financial responsibility. An SR-22 is not an actual “type” of insurance, but 
a form filed with the state. This form serves as proof your auto insurance policy meets the minimum 
liability coverage required by state law. 
• Point Violations:
– 2 Points - Moving violations, some speed offenses, restriction violations
– 4 Points - Willful or wanton disregard for safety of person or property
– 6 Points - Failure to stop and disclose identity after a crash among other dangerous and serious 
actions
Suspension of Probationary License (Under Age 18)  — The BMV will automatically impose license 
suspension for drivers under age 18 in these circumstances:
• A conviction of, or guilty plea to two moving violations, results in an automatic three-month license 
suspension;
• A conviction of, or guilty plea to three moving violations, results in an automatic one-year license 
suspension; and 
• A conviction of, or guilty plea to Probationary Operating a Vehicle Under the Influence , results in a six-
month license suspension. 
Reinstatement requirements must be satisfied upon serving the suspension, including obtaining a TIPIC, 
completing an approved juvenile driver improvement program, and passing the driving examination. 
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 6: State Laws and Penalties
27
Driving Under Suspension  — Operating a motor vehicle while your license is under suspension is a 
first-degree misdemeanor, and if convicted, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000. You may also be 
sentenced to an additional one-year Driver License suspension. Vehicle owners who knowingly allow 
someone with a suspended license to operate their vehicle may be subject to the same penalty as the 
driver who is under suspension.
RIDING ON THE OUTSIDE OF A VEHICLE - ORC 4511.51  
No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any moving motor vehicle. No driver of a truck, 
trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit any person under age 16 to ride in the unenclosed or 
unroofed cargo storage area of the vehicle if it is traveling faster than 25 mph, unless any of the following 
apply:
• The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly secured seat and a safety belt that 
complies with federal standards for occupant restraining devices.
• An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the person being transported in the cargo 
storage area of the truck, trailer, or semitrailer.
• The passengers are workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction 
under the authority of a public agency.
CHILD PASSENGER RESTRAINTS/SAFETY LAWS - ORC 4511.81  
Ohio law requires use of a child safety seat that meets federal motor safety standards. Make sure it is 
installed properly in your vehicle and used in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Check 
to be sure that all children age 12 and younger are properly restrained in the back seat and that a rear-
facing child safety seat is never placed in front of an active passenger airbag .
Under Age 4 & weight less than 40 pounds —  Infants and children who are either or both under age 
4 and weighing less than 40 pounds must be properly restrained in a child safety seat while being 
transported in a motor vehicle. The child seat must be labeled as meeting federal safety standards and 
be designed to meet the needs of your particular motor vehicle. 
Age 4 & weight 40 pounds but under age 8 —  When any child who is at least age 4, but less than age 8, 
is being transported in a motor vehicle, the vehicle operator shall have the child properly restrained in a 
booster seat unless the child is 4-foot 9-inches in height, or taller. 
Age 8 but under age 15 —  When any child at least age 8 but not older than age 15, is being transported in 
a motor vehicle, the vehicle operator shall have the child properly restrained with a safety belt. 
Children age 12 and younger  should sit in the rear seat of the vehicle to avoid injury from an air bag in 
the event of a crash.
Exemptions to the information above include public safety vehicles, taxicabs, and vehicles not required 
by law to be equipped with safety belts at the time of manufacture. 
Read your vehicle owner’s manual and child restraint directions for specific information on the child 
restraint system in your vehicle.
For information on child passenger safety and the law, 
call the Ohio Department of Health’s toll-free number, 1-800-755-GROW. 
Visit the Ohio Department of Health website for additional resources.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 6: State Laws and Penalties
28
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
POLICE AND TRAFFIC STOPS 
What to do if you are pulled over by law enforcement:
• Activate your turn signal and when it is safe to do so, pull over on the right 
side of the roadway, or at the nearest safe location.
– Move your vehicle from “DRIVE” gear to “PARK” gear
– Turn ignition to “OFF” (or press “STOP” button)
• Lower the window and remain in the vehicle unless told otherwise by the 
officer. 
• Stay calm and keep your safety belt fastened.
• Keep hands on the steering wheel in view of the officer.
• If you have a weapon(s) in the vehicle, inform the officer upon first contact.
• Obey the directions of the officer. 
• When requested, present Driver License, vehicle registration, and insurance information.
• Be cooperative and do not argue with the officer. If you have questions, politely ask for clarification.
• If you disagree with a traffic ticket, you may contest the ticket in court.
Additional information is available in this “ What to Do If You Are Pulled Over” video. 
WHEN TO USE HEADLIGHTS – OAC 4501-15-01  
Lights must be on:
• Between sunset and sunrise.
• During any period of rain, snow, fog, or other unfavorable atmospheric conditions — 
regardless of the time of day.
• At any other time when natural light conditions do not make it possible to clearly see objects 1,000 
feet ahead.
• Any time windshield wipers are in use because of precipitation.
NIGHT DRIVING
Driving at night is more difficult and hazardous than daytime driving. The distance you can see in front 
of your vehicle is limited by the amount of lighting provided by your headlights. To maintain safety while 
driving at night:
• Headlights must be on between sunset and sunrise.
• Maintain a cautious and reasonable speed.
• Use high beam headlights whenever there are no oncoming vehicles. Ohio law requires you to dim 
your high beam headlights for approaching traffic. 
• To keep from being momentarily blinded by an approaching vehicle’s headlights, look toward the right 
side of the road.
• Glance occasionally to the right and left to determine the location of the edge of the pavement and 
hazards that may come from the sides.
• Do not wear sunglasses or colored lenses when driving at night or on overcast days. Tinted or colored 
lenses reduce your vision.
SECTION 7: Special Driving Situations IN SECTION 7:
• POLICE AND TRAFFIC STOPS
• WHEN TO USE HEADLIGHTS
• NIGHT DRIVING 
• DRIVING IN FOG
• WINTER DRIVING
• WORK ZONES
29
DRIVING IN FOG
Fog is one of the most hazardous conditions a motorist can drive in. Slow Down!  
• Move with the flow of traffic, but drive slower with the expectation that you may need to stop at any 
time. Keep a consistent distance behind the vehicle in front of you.
• Use low beam headlights (not high beam lights) and keep scanning the area for any potential hazards. 
• Shift your gaze instead of staring.
• If involved in a crash, get your vehicle off the road as soon as safely possible. If the vehicle cannot 
move, leave your flashers and lights on and set up flares if possible. 
WINTER DRIVING 
Driving in the winter is much different from driving in any other season of the year. No matter the road 
or weather conditions, a slower speed is necessary for safe handling of your vehicle, but especially 
important on snow-covered or icy roads. Put a greater distance than usual between you and other 
vehicles, as vehicles need a greater stopping distance on slippery roads. 
Remember: Bridges, overpasses, and shaded spots on a highway ice first! Lightly tapping on 
the brake helps to reduce momentum without losing traction. If your vehicle starts to skid, 
take your foot off the accelerator and turn the steering wheel in the direction of the skid. 
Never apply brakes while skidding.
WORK ZONES
A Work Zone is an area where roadwork takes place and may involve lane closures, detours, and moving 
equipment. Work Zones are dangerous places for both workers and drivers. When approaching a Work 
Zone, watch for signs, cones, barrels, large vehicles, and workers. 
Work Zone signs have an orange background and black letters or symbols. Always reduce your speed 
in a Work Zone, even if there are no workers. The narrower lanes and rough pavement can create a 
hazardous condition. 
The Ohio Department of Transportation provides more information on Work Zone safety.
SECTION 7: Special Driving Situations
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
30
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
Driving requires skills you can only gain through practice and experience. The 
following section offers some driving tips that you can practice to help you 
become a safer and more skillful driver.
VISUAL SEARCH
You are responsible for knowing what is happening around your vehicle. Develop 
a searching pattern that you can use every time you drive. Searching helps you to 
see situations that could cause a problem, and gives you time to change speed or 
roadway position. 
LOOK AHEAD
Looking down your planned path 
of travel helps you see the road, 
other road users, and traffic 
conditions. It also gives you time 
to adjust and plan your driving 
movements. Ideally, try to look 
at what is occurring 20 to 30 
seconds in front of your car.
LOOK TO THE SIDES
Search to the sides to make 
sure other traffic will not cross 
your travel path. Look over your 
shoulders towards the rear to 
check your blind spots. 
LOOK TO THE REAR
Use your mirrors to check 
traffic that is behind you. It is 
very important to check traffic 
behind you when changing lanes, 
slowing down or stopping, and 
entering an intersection. 
SPEED MANAGEMENT —  ADJUSTING TO ROADWAY CONDITIONS
Driving safely means adjusting your vehicle speed for roadway and traffic conditions, providing an 
adequate following interval and obeying the appropriate speed limits. 
Curves — Before entering a curve, reduce speed to a safe speed that allows you to apply 
slight and constant acceleration through the curve. Reduce speed more when traction is poor, 
when following other vehicles, and when you cannot see the end of the curve. 
Slippery Roads — Reduce speed at the first sign of rain, snow, sleet, or ice. When the roadway 
is slippery, your tires do not grip as well. It will take longer to stop, and it will be harder to turn 
without skidding. If your vehicle begins to slide, slowly ease your foot off the gas pedal and 
gently apply the brake. Always reduce your speed and allow extra distance between you and 
the vehicle ahead if the road is wet or covered with snow or ice.
Hydroplaning — Hydroplaning occurs when the steering tires start to ride on top of pooled water, similar 
to the action of water skis. The best way to avoid traction loss from hydroplaning is to slow down when 
driving in the rain and when the road is wet with pooled water or water puddles. When hydroplaning, 
slowly ease your foot off the gas pedal.
Flooded Roadways —  Do not drive through large bodies of standing water on a road. 
If you see a flooded roadway, find another route to get to your destination.
52$':$<
68%-(&772
)/22',1*
+,*+
:$7(5
:$7&+
)25:$7(5
2152$'
IN SECTION 8:
• VISUAL SEARCH
• SPEED MANAGEMENT – 
ADJUSTING TO ROADWAY 
CONDITIONS
• SPACE MANAGEMENT
• COMMUNICATING
• PREVENTING INJURY FROM
HOT VEHICLES
SECTION 8: Safe Driving Tips
31
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SPACE MANAGEMENT
You will share the road with a variety of other roadway users. A “space cushion” is the space you allow 
between your vehicle and other roadway users — providing time for you to react. Always try to maintain 
a safe space cushion around your vehicle.
Stopping Distance = Space Cushion
Stopping distance is the distance your vehicle travels, in ideal conditions, from the time you realize you 
must stop until your vehicle stops. Several things may affect your stopping distance:
Speed -  The rate you are traveling. The faster you are traveling, the more time and distance is needed to 
stop.
Perception Time -  The time and distance it takes you to recognize the need to stop. The average 
perception time for an alert driver is ¾ second to 1 second.
Reaction Time  - The time and distance it takes for you to react and move your foot from the gas pedal, 
and begin applying the brakes. The average driver has a reaction time of ¾ second to 1 second.
Braking Distance  - The time and distance it takes for your brakes to slow and stop a vehicle. At 50 mph 
on dry pavement with good brakes, it can take about 158 feet to stop.
Space to the Front
Always try to keep a minimum following distance of one vehicle length for every 10 miles per hour of 
travel, or four seconds between your vehicle and the vehicle ahead.
Determine a four-second following distance: 
• When the rear of the vehicle ahead passes a stationary point, such as a sign or pole, begin counting 
the seconds it takes you to reach that same stationary point – “one-thousand-one, one-thousand-two, 
one-thousand-three, one-thousand-four. 
• You are following too closely if you pass the stationary point before counting four seconds.
• Reduce speed and then count again at another stationary point to check the new following interval. 
Repeat until you are following no closer than four seconds.
• After practicing, guess how many seconds away you are from an object and then count the seconds it 
takes to reach the object to see how accurate you are.
There are certain situations when more space in front of your vehicle is needed. Increase your following 
distance when:
• Visibility is lessened or limited by the weather (fog, rain, snow, etc.), or at night.
• On slippery roads. 
• Following large vehicles such as trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, and vehicles pulling a trailer.
• Following vehicles required to stop at railroad crossings, such as buses, or vehicles carrying 
hazardous materials.
SECTION 8: Safe Driving Tips
32
Space to the Side
A space cushion on the sides of your vehicle lessens the crash risks with options to move right or left.
• Avoid driving next to other vehicles for long periods of time. You may be in the driver’s blind spot, and 
it reduces the space you may need to avoid a crash.
• Avoid crowding the center line lane marking. Try to keep as much space as possible between you and 
oncoming traffic.
• Make space for vehicles entering a multiple-lane or limited access roadway by moving over a lane or 
adjusting your speed.
• Give extra space to pedestrians, especially children, and bicyclists.
• When a passing vehicle is a tractor-trailer, leave a little more space by moving to the outside portion 
of your lane space, away from the tractor-trailer as it passes.
Space Behind 
It is not always easy to maintain a safe following distance behind your vehicle. However, you can help 
keep the driver behind you at a safe distance by keeping a steady speed, signaling in advance, and 
keeping more space to the front of your vehicle before reducing speed or turning. 
COMMUNICATING
Letting Others Know Y ou Are There
It is your responsibility to make your vehicle visible to other roadway users.  
Use Headlights  —   Ohio law requires headlights to be used from sunset to sunrise, at any 
time visibility is poor (rain, snow, fog, etc.), and any time the windshield wipers are in use 
because of precipitation. High beam headlights can be used at any time headlights are 
used except when an oncoming vehicle is approaching.
Use Your Horn  —   A vehicle’s horn, when used properly, can be used to get the attention of other road 
users. Tap your horn lightly to communicate to others when:  
• Pedestrians or bicyclists appear to be moving into your lane of travel.
• Passing a driver who starts to turn into your lane.
• A driver is not paying attention or may have trouble seeing you.
Not Using Your Horn  —   Only use your horn when you need to communicate with other road users. Using 
your horn inappropriately could scare or anger another road user.
Signaling Y our Movements
Signal Before Changing Direction —   An appropriate signal gives other roadway users time to react to 
your vehicle movements. Use a turn signal when changing lanes, when merging into traffic, or when 
turning left or right. Signal a turn at least 100 feet ahead of the turn. Make sure you cancel your signal to 
avoid confusing other drivers.
Signal When Reducing Speed —   Brake lights let other roadway users know that the vehicle is slowing 
down or stopping. Use turn signals before reducing speed when:
• Turning off a roadway that does not have separate turning or exiting lanes.
• Parking or turning before an intersection.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 8: Safe Driving Tips
33
PREVENTING INJURY FROM HOT VEHICLES
Children 
About 38 kids die each year in the U.S. from vehicular heatstroke, according to KidsAndCars.org
and NoHeatStroke.org .
Supervision —  Never leave children alone in, or around cars! 
Look Before You Lock —   Make it a habit to look in the backseat before locking your doors. (Look Before 
You Lock™ is a KidsandCars.org™ campaign)
Reminders —  Create a reminder to check the back seat. Reminders include: 
• Leave items you’ll need in the back seat, such as your purse, brief case, cell phone, employee ID, etc. 
• Keep a stuffed animal in the front passenger seat to create a visual reminder.
Set up a “Drop-off Policy” — Ask your childcare provider to contact you in the event your child does not 
arrive as scheduled. 
Lock Your Vehicle —  Create the habit of always locking your vehicle’s doors and trunk, year-round. Ask 
your childcare provider, friends, and neighbors to do the same.
Missing Child —  If a child goes missing, check the vehicle passenger compartments and trunks of all 
vehicles in the area, even if they are locked. A child may lock the doors after entering. 
Take Action! — If you see a child alone in a vehicle:
– Call 911 immediately. Check for unlocked doors and try to locate the parent while you make the call.
– If the child is in distress or unresponsive, take action to remove the child from the vehicle. Break a 
window if necessary. Many states, including Ohio, have “Good Samaritan” laws that protect people 
from lawsuits after responding in an emergency.
– Stay with the child until help arrives.
Pets
Remember your “furry friends” as well, and don’t leave them in your vehicle. Even with the 
windows cracked, the temperature in a vehicle can increase 20 degrees (Fahrenheit) in just 10 
minutes. 
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 8: Safe Driving Tips
34
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
Everybody has a right to the roadway. Remember to be courteous and 
communicate your presence and intentions to avoid crashes.
PEDESTRIANS
Pedestrians can be difficult to see and it may be difficult to determine their 
intentions. Pedestrians don’t always obey traffic signals or walk in marked 
crosswalks, so as a driver, you must yield to pedestrians.
Caution:
• Pedestrians who are visually impaired or blind (carrying a white cane or using 
a guide dog) have the right-of-way.
• Yield to pedestrians when turning. 
• Be cautious around pedestrians near parked or stopped vehicles. 
• Look for pedestrians and other objects before backing up. 
• Be cautious near playgrounds and in residential areas. Be prepared to stop quickly. 
• School Zones - When lights are flashing or children are present, you must obey a slower speed limit. 
Obey Crossing Guards at intersections near a school. 
MOTORCYCLISTS
Motorcyclists have the same rights and responsibilities as other drivers. However, it may be 
more difficult to see them. There are special situations and conditions we need to be aware of 
so we can safely share the road with motorcycles:
• Allow a motorcyclist a full lane width; space is needed for the motorcyclist to react to 
other traffic.
• Be aware that motorcycles can be part of the traffic mix. Always check your mirrors and blind spots 
for them.
• Motorcycles require a greater stopping distance than cars and other passenger vehicles.
• Do not assume a motorcycle is turning when you see its turn signal flashing. Motorcycle turn signals 
may not self-cancel, and the motorcyclist may have forgotten to turn them off. 
• When following a motorcyclist, allow for a minimum 4-second following distance or more in wet 
conditions, or you may not have enough time or space to avoid a crash.
• Motorcycle riders may suddenly need to change speed or adjust lane position to avoid hazards such 
as potholes, gravel, wet or slippery surfaces, pavement seams, railroad crossings, and grooved 
pavement, which can be deadly to a motorcyclist. 
IN SECTION 9:
• PEDESTRIANS
• MOTORCYCLISTS
• BICYCLISTS
• COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
• EMERGENCY VEHICLES
• MOVE OVER LAWS
• SLOW MOVING VEHICLES
SECTION 9: Sharing the Road
35
 LEFT TURN STOPPING RIGHT TURN RIGHT TURN
  OR SLOWING (LEFT ARM SIGNAL) (RIGHT ARM SIGNAL)
BICYCLISTS - ORC 4511.52
Bicycles are considered vehicles when on roadways and must ride with, not against, other vehicular 
traffic. 
Bicyclists are required and expected to:
• Obey all traffic signs, signals, and pavement markings.
• Follow the same rules of the road as motorized vehicles. 
As a driver – be alert for bicyclists:
• Slow down when approaching or passing a 
bicyclist.
• Avoid sounding your horn close to a bicyclist.
• Only pass a bicyclist when it can be done 
safely. 
• Maintain a safety zone of at least three feet 
between a motor vehicle and a bicycle. 
• Avoid turning sharply in front of a bicyclist and 
do not force a bicyclist off the road. 
• Be particularly careful around bicyclists when 
the roadway is wet or covered with sand or 
gravel. These conditions affect bicycles much 
more than motor vehicles.
• Check for bicyclists in your path before backing. 
• Learn bicycle hand signals. If bicyclists cannot 
signal, look for other clues such as turning 
their head or looking over their shoulder before 
changing lanes.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 9: Sharing the Road
36
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Many crashes that occur between passenger vehicles and commercial vehicles could be avoided. 
Remember a truck’s limitations by keeping these points in mind:
• Commercial vehicles are generally larger vehicles and less maneuverable than passenger vehicles.
• These vehicles have much larger blind spots than passenger vehicles.
• They have longer stopping and accelerating distances and need more room to turn.
T urning
Give large vehicles plenty of room to maneuver a turn. Trucks or buses may make a wide right turn from 
the left lane to clear the corner of a curb or other obstruction. Do not squeeze between the large vehicle 
and the curb, as it will cause a serious crash. Let the large vehicle make its turn before driving up into the 
lane.  
Always stop behind intersection stop lines. These stop lines help to set you farther back at an 
intersection to give larger vehicles more turning space. 
Many crashes with large vehicles occur at intersections as motorists misjudge the speed of an 
approaching truck. When in doubt about the speed of an oncoming truck or bus, do not turn left in its 
path. Trucks and buses take longer to stop than smaller vehicles. 
Do not cut off a large vehicle in traffic or on the highway to reach an exit or turn, or to beat a truck into a 
single-lane construction zone. The few seconds that might be saved are not worth a life.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 9: Sharing the Road
37
The “No Zone”   
The “No Zone” is the area around large trucks or buses where vehicles disappear from the driver’s view 
called “blind spots.” These blind spots are on the sides, rear, and front of the large vehicle. Keep in mind: 
the larger the truck, the larger the blind spot. 
Side No Zones — Large trucks and 
buses have large “No Zones” on both 
sides. They are much larger than your 
vehicle’s blind spots. If you cannot 
see the driver’s face in the side-view 
mirror, the driver cannot see you. 
Avoid driving alongside a large vehicle 
for any longer than required under any 
circumstances. If the driver needs to 
swerve or change lanes, the chances of 
a crash are greatly increased.
Front No Zones  — Because of a large 
vehicle’s size and weight, they take 
longer to stop than passenger vehicles. 
A loaded truck with good tires and 
properly adjusted brakes, under 
ideal conditions, traveling at 55 mph 
requires a minimum of 335 feet before 
coming to a complete stop, or greater 
than 1½ times the stopping distance of 
a passenger vehicle. When passing a 
large vehicle, look for the whole front 
of the vehicle in your rear-view mirror 
before pulling in front of the vehicle 
and maintaining speed.
Rear No Zones  — Unlike passenger 
vehicles, large vehicles have huge 
blind spots directly behind them that 
extend up to 200 feet. Avoid following 
the vehicle too closely. If you are too 
close, the large vehicle cannot see 
your passenger vehicle, nor can you 
see what is ahead of you. Position 
your vehicle so the driver can see you 
in the side-view mirrors. Avoid the 
right lanes when traveling up or down 
steep hills behind a large vehicle or 
near truck weigh stations where large 
vehicles may be attempting to re-enter 
faster moving traffic. By avoiding 
the right lane in these areas, you will 
reduce the possibility of a crash.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 9: Sharing the Road
38
EMERGENCY VEHICLES (POLICE, FIRE, MEDICAL VEHICLES) 
When emergency vehicles displaying flashing lights and audible sirens and/or signals are approaching 
through traffic, the driver must quickly — and safely — pull to the right side of the road and stop. Avoid 
blocking intersections. All vehicles must remain in this position until the emergency vehicle has passed 
or otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer.
MOVE OVER LAWS
Ohio law requires all drivers to move to an adjacent lane and/or slow down when approaching a stopped 
police vehicle, other emergency vehicle (like a fire truck), road service vehicle (such as a tow truck or 
snowplow), waste collection vehicle, highway maintenance vehicle, or public utility commission vehicle 
when these vehicles have their warning lights acti vated. Every U.S. state has a Move Over law.
When approaching an authorized vehicle stopped on the roadside, proceed with caution. Slow down 
and yield the right-of-way by making a lane change into a lane not next to that of the vehicle if safety 
and traffic conditions permit. If a lane change is unsafe, slow down and proceed with caution while 
maintaining a safe speed for traffic conditions.
SLOW MOVING VEHICLES – ORC 4511.31
Be alert for slow moving vehicles, especially in rural areas. A fluorescent or reflective orange and 
red triangle displayed on the rear of vehicles drawn by animals, farm equipment, or construction 
equipment means the vehicle is traveling less than 25 mph. Vehicles moving slower than the traffic 
flow must use the available right lane or stay as close as possible to the right-hand curb or edge 
of the highway. Use caution when passing. You are permitted to cross a solid yellow line to pass a 
slow-moving vehicle as long as the vehicle is traveling less than half the posted speed limit, you do not 
exceed the speed limit while passing, and there is sufficient clear space in the oncoming lane in 
which to pass. 
Farm Machinery  — Watch for tractors, combines, and other farm equipment moving across the 
road and traveling on state highways in rural areas. Pass with caution and remember 
that the operator of the farm machinery cannot hear approaching vehicles. Farm 
machinery must display the slow-moving emblem, and use a red flashing light at night. 
Animal-Drawn Vehicles and Horseback Riders  — In some rural areas, you may 
be sharing the road with animal-drawn vehicles and horseback riders, which 
have the same rights as a motor vehicle and must follow the same rules of the 
road. Warning signs will be posted in areas where you are likely to find animal-
drawn vehicles and horseback riders, so be alert.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 9: Sharing the Road
39
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
AVOIDING CRASHES
All drivers eventually will find themselves in an emergency situation. As 
careful as you are, there are situations that could cause problems. If you are 
prepared, you may be able to prevent any serious outcomes. All drivers have the 
responsibility to prevent crashes. 
Braking
The first reaction for most drivers to avoid a crash is to stop the vehicle. Most new vehicles 
are equipped with ABS (anti-lock braking system) to stop your vehicle without skidding (see 
the vehicle owner’s manual for proper braking information). 
Steering
You may be able to avoid a crash by quickly steering around a problem. This is sometimes referred to as 
“swerving.” Grip the steering wheel in both hands and steer in the direction to avoid other traffic. Steer 
in the opposite direction to straighten out your vehicle, gain control, and start slowing. 
Accelerating
It may be necessary to accelerate to avoid a crash. This may happen when another vehicle is about to hit 
you from behind or the side.
Skids 
Skids are caused when you are traveling too fast 
for conditions, when you stop too suddenly, or 
when the tires can no longer grip the roadway. 
When you begin to skid, release pressure from the 
brake or accelerator and turn the wheel into the 
skid.
Inoperable T raffic Signals
At times, power outages can result in non-working traffic signals. By law, except when a law enforcement 
officer is present to direct traffic, drivers must treat the non-working traffic signal as a four-way stop. 
Carefully proceed through the intersection, as other drivers may not stop. 
Uneven Surface Drop-Offs
Uneven surface drop-offs can cause serious crashes. If your vehicle leaves the paved road 
surface, let off the accelerator, slow down gradually, and when safe to do so, return to the 
pavement. 
IN SECTION 10:
• AVOIDING CRASHES
• VEHICLE MALFUNCTIONS
• IN THE EVENT OF A CRASH
SECTION 10:  Emergency Situations
40
VEHICLE MALFUNCTIONS
There is always a chance of a vehicle problem while driving. Follow the recommended maintenance 
schedule listed in the vehicle owner’s manual. In the event of an issue, follow these procedures and seek 
assistance:  
Brake Failure
If your brakes fail while driving:
• Use the parking brake - pull on the parking brake handle in the center console or push the 
parking brake foot pedal slowly so you will not lock the rear wheels and cause a skid.
• If that does not work, turn off the engine, pull off the road, and turn on emergency flashers. 
Stuck Accelerator
If your vehicle is accelerating out of control:
• Turn on emergency flashers, shift to “NEUTRAL ” gear, and search for an escape route.
• Steer smoothly, brake gradually, and pull off the roadway.
• Shift to “PARK” gear and turn off the engine.
Tire Blowout
If a front tire blows out, the vehicle will pull sharply in the direction of the blowout. 
If a rear tire blows out, the vehicle will wobble, shake, and pull some in the direction of the 
blowout.
• Grip the steering wheel firmly and keep the vehicle going straight.
• Do not brake; slow down gradually.
• Pull off the road in a safe place and turn on hazard lights. 
• Shift to “PARK” gear, turn off the engine.
Power Failure
If the engine shuts off while you are driving:
• Keep a strong grip on the steering wheel. Be aware that the steering wheel may be difficult to turn, but 
you can turn it.
• Brake with steady pressure on the pedal, slow down, and pull off the roadway.
• Shift to “PARK” gear. Try to restart the engine. If unsuccessful, raise the hood and turn on the 
emergency flashers.
Vehicle Breakdown
If your vehicle breaks down:
• Get your vehicle off the road and away from traffic, if possible.
• Turn on your emergency flashers to show your vehicle is disabled.
• Try to warn other roadway users that your vehicle is there. If possible, place emergency flares about 
200 to 300 feet behind the vehicle. This alerts other drivers, giving them some time to change lanes (to 
‘move over’).
• Stay in your vehicle until help arrives. 
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 10:  Emergency Situations
41
IN THE EVENT OF A CRASH - ORC 4509.01, 4509.06, 4549.02, 4549.021, AND 4549.03
If you are involved in a crash, move your vehicle off the roadway as far as possible. If you cannot move 
your vehicle, ensure your hazard lights are on and set up road flares if you have them.
Stay Calm and Remain at the Scene
• Stop and take immediate steps to warn approaching traffic. Turn on your hazard lights. In minor 
crashes, if possible and safe to do so, remove your vehicle from the flow of traffic.
• Remain as calm as possible and avoid any argument.
• Do not leave the scene until you have exchanged contact and insurance information with those 
involved, which includes leaving a note if the damaged vehicle was not occupied.
Check for Injuries and Request Assistance
• Check yourself and others for injuries.
• Call emergency services (911) if anyone has been injured.
• Do not move the injured; keep them warm.
• Notify the proper authorities — either the Ohio State Highway Patrol, Sheriff, or local police.
Crash Details and Contact Information
• Exchange information with others involved in the accident, but do not discuss fault or insurance 
coverage. Provide and/or collect:
– Names and addresses of those involved or those who witnessed the crash
– Name and contact information of the vehicle owner if not involved/present
– License plate number and vehicle make and model of vehicles involved
– Name, address, and policy number of insurance company 
• Take note of circumstances of the crash, such as chain of events, weather, road conditions, and traffic 
controls.
• Answer all of the investigating officer’s questions, but do not discuss the accident with others.
Report the Crash
• Notify your insurance company as soon as possible. 
• If involved in a crash with an unattended vehicle, you must report the crash to the police or leave 
necessary information at the scene. 
• The driver of a vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash in Ohio may file a Crash Report  (form BMV 
3303) with the Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles within six months  after the crash if both of the following 
apply:
– There was damage in excess of $400, or personal injury; and
– The driver or owner of the other vehicle did not have insurance or other financial responsibility 
coverage at the time of the crash.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 10:  Emergency Situations
42
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
MANEUVERABILITY AND ON-ROAD SKILLS TESTING 
Once a driver is confident with their capabilities and all requirements have been 
met, it is time to take the maneuverability and on-road skills tests! Schedule the 
driving test online at www.ohiodrivingtest.com  or in person at a Driver Exam 
Station. Designated Testing Locations in partnership with the Ohio BMV are 
authorized to collect fees to cover the cost of administering the skills test.
The applicant must present his or her TIPIC and provide a vehicle in good condition for testing. A vehicle 
inspection performed before the test begins will check the working order of turn signals, brake lights, 
horn, windshield wipers, and headlights. Front doors must be able to open from the inside and outside 
with the door handle. Vehicle registration must be current and displayed on the license plate. Automated 
assistance tools, such as automated parking, must be disabled.
Disability Accommodations:
To request accommodations, e-mail the Ohio Department of Public Safety’s ADA Coordinators at
HRRequestADA@dps.ohio.gov.
Maneuverability Skills T est 
Vehicle maneuverability skills are evaluated on a course indicated by five markers. Points are deducted 
for stopping, bumping markers, misjudging stopping distance, or not being parallel with the test area. 
It is an immediate failure if a driver runs over or knocks down a marker, removes the marker from the 
designated area, or other dangerous actions.
 MANEUVERABILITY TEST — STEP ONE:
– Drive forward through a 9-foot x 20-foot course formed by four markers. Measurements are taken 
from the one center marker. 
– The Driver Examiner directs you to steer to the right or the left of the center marker.
– Steer straight ahead and stop when the rear bumper of the vehicle is even with the center marker 
and generally parallel with the course.
IN SECTION 11:
• MANEUVERABILITY & 
ON-ROAD SKILLS TESTING
• ABBREVIATED ADULT 
DRIVING TRAINING COURSE
SECTION 11:  Taking the Driving Test
43
 MANEUVERABILITY TEST — STEP TWO:
– From the stopped position at the end of Step One, move in reverse past the center marker. 
Straighten the vehicle and continue back through the course, coming to a stop with the front bumper 
even with the two rear markers and generally parallel with the course. 
– Remove the vehicle from the test course area without running over markers or performing any other 
disqualifying actions. 
On-Road Skills T est 
A Driver Examiner evaluates driving skills while riding as a front-seat passenger. The driver examiner 
provides travel instructions to the driver. 
During the evaluation, these actions are performed and assessed: 
– Stop and start the vehicle
– Turn around and back up 
– Perform turns 
– Use vehicle turn signals 
– Drive in the correct lane 
– Maintain a safe following 
distance 
T est Failure 
Under Age 21 — Applicants must wait two days before retesting.
Age 21 and Older — See the Abbreviated Adult Driver Training Course information on the next page. 
An applicant age 21 or older who fails the maneuverability or road skills portion of the driving test, 
is required to take an Abbreviated Adult Driver Training Course before attempting the driving test for 
a second time. If the applicant has had an approved driver education course within one year prior to 
testing, they will not be required to take the Abbreviated Adult Driver Training Course . Proof of the 
approved driver education shall be presented before testing a second time.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 11:  Taking the Driving Test
44
ABBREVIATED ADULT DRIVER TRAINING COURSE - OAC 4501-8
Individuals over 21 years of age who have failed the driving test the first time must take the Abbreviated 
Adult Driver Training Course, unless they have taken an approved driver education course within one 
year of the test. For Abbreviated Adult Driver Training Course providers, visit Ohio Driver Training
(www.drivertraining.ohio.gov ).
Proof of the approved driver education shall be presented before testing a second time. There are four 
options available to take the required Abbreviated Adult Driver Training Course :
• A 4-hour in-person class followed by 4 hours of behind-the-wheel instruction (provided by a licensed 
abbreviated adult driver training school). 
• A 4-hour state-approved online course followed by 4 hours of behind-the-wheel instruction (provided 
by a licensed abbreviated adult driver training school). 
• A 4-hour in-person class followed by 24 hours of driving with a licensed driver age 21 or older.
• A 4-hour state-approved online course followed by 24 hours of driving with a licensed driver age 21 or 
older. 
– Applicants who choose the option for 24 hours of driving with a licensed driver age 21 or older, 
cannot complete more than four hours of driving in one day. 
– In addition, applicants who choose this option are required to complete the Twenty-Four Hour 
Affidavit (form BMV 5789). 
Before the second attempt at the driving test, the applicant must:
• Provide an Abbreviated Adult Driver Training Course Certificate of Completion. 
• If applicable, provide a completed, notarized Twenty-Four Hour Affidavit  (form BMV 5789).
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 11:  Taking the Driving Test
45
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
PURCHASING YOUR DRIVER LICENSE 
You Passed! After passing both  the on-road skills and the maneuverability skills 
tests, visit a Deputy Registrar License Agency to purchase your Driver License.
• Bring these documents with you to the Deputy Registrar agency:
– Temporary Instruction Permit Identification Card (TIPIC)
– Proof of identity documents (see Acceptable Documents List )
– If applicable, notarized Twenty-Four Hour Affidavit  (form BMV 5789) for those age 21 years and 
older. (Notaries are available at the Deputy Registrar agency.)
– If the applicant is under age 18
 Notarized Fifty-Hour Affidavit (form BMV 5791),
 The applicant’s parent or guardian must:
� Present identification (e.g., Driver License or ID card), and 
� Co-sign the Driver License application.
– If the applicant is 18 or older but under the age of 21
 Notarized Fifty-Hour Affidavit (form BMV 5791)
– If the applicant is a temporary resident age 21 or older
 Notarized Fifty-Hour Affidavit (form BMV 5791)
• Get In Line Online before visiting the Deputy Registrar License Agency .
Co-signer Responsibility
The parent or legal guardian who co-signs a minor’s application for a license is 
jointly, and severally, liable with the minor for any damages caused by negligence 
or willful misconduct while operating a motor vehicle until the minor’s 18th 
birthday.
If the minor is involved in a collision, co-signer liability can be eliminated by filing 
proof of financial responsibility on behalf of the minor with the Bureau of Motor 
Vehicles (see Section Six – Financial Responsibility).
A cosigner can cancel authorization for a minor at any time by mailing the minor’s 
Driver License or TIPIC or a notarized letter requesting the cancelation to this 
address:
OHIO BUREAU OF MOTOR VEHICLES
ATTN: LICENSE CONTROL
P.O. BOX 16521
COLUMBUS, OHIO 43216
The license or TIPIC will be canceled, and the cosigner will be relieved from the 
liability imposed by ORC 4507.07(B).
IN SECTION 12:
• PURCHASING YOUR DRIVER 
LICENSE
• RENEWING YOUR DRIVER 
LICENSE
• DRIVER LICENSE CLASSES 
SECTION 12:  Purchase Y our Driver License
46
Driver License: Compliant vs. Standard 
Ohioans have the option to choose between a Compliant Driver License and a Standard  Driver License 
card. Choose the type of card that works best for you:
COMPLIANT CARD STANDARD CARD
Meets national travel security 
requirements. A federally-compliant form 
of identification will be required to fly 
commercially or to access federal facilities 
or military bases.
Obtaining a Compliant card requires more 
identity documents  than the Standard 
card. You must provide documents to 
prove:  
• Full legal name
• Date of birth
• Social Security number
• Ohio street address — two documents
• Citizenship or legal presence in the 
United States
Does not meet national travel security 
requirements. A Standard Card will 
need to be used in conjunction with a 
passport or other acceptable documents 
approved by the Transportation Security 
Administration (TSA) in order to fly 
commercially or to access a federal facility 
or military base. Please see www.tsa.gov/
travel/security-screening/identification  for 
more information. 
The Standard card does not require 
additional identity documents,  unless the 
Driver License or ID card is being issued 
for the first time.
You will receive your new Driver License or ID card by mail.
Proof of Identity – Acceptable Documents List 
Applicants for a TIPIC, any type of Driver License, or state ID card must first provide acceptable 
documentation for proof of identity that includes the following five elements:
• Full Legal Name
• Date of Birth
• Social Security number 
• Ohio Street Address (Compliant card requires two documents proving address)
• Citizenship or Legal Presence in the United States
Visit the BMV website to view the Compliant and Standard Acceptable Documents Lists.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 12:  Purchase Y our Driver License
47
During the first 12 months 
of holding a Driver License:
• The driver may not operate a vehicle from 
midnight to 6 a.m., unless:
– Accompanied by a parent or guardian,
– Driving to or from work, with documentation 
from the employer (Form BMV 2825),
– Driving to or from an official school-
sponsored event or a religious event, with 
appropriate documentation from the event 
official (Form BMV 2826).
• The driver and all passengers must wear 
safety belts. The number of occupants cannot 
exceed the number of safety belts originally 
installed. 
• The driver may not use any devices, including 
phones, while operating a vehicle. 
• A conviction of a traffic offense within the 
first months of having a license may result 
in a parent or legal guardian required to 
accompany the driver for six months, or until 
the driver reaches age 17.
• The driver may not operate a vehicle with 
more than one non-family member as a 
passenger, unless accompanied by a parent or 
guardian. 
After the first 12 months
of holding a Driver License:
• The driver may not operate a vehicle from 
1 a.m. to 5 a.m., unless:
– Accompanied by a parent or guardian,
– Driving to or from work, with documentation 
from the employer (Form BMV 2825),
– Driving to or from an official school-
sponsored event or a religious event, with 
appropriate documentation from the event 
official (Form BMV 2826).
• The driver and all passengers must wear 
safety belts. The number of occupants cannot 
exceed the number of safety belts originally 
installed.
• The driver may not use any devices, including 
phones, while operating a vehicle.
• Multiple traffic convictions before the driver 
reaches age 18 may result in a 90-day license 
suspension.
• For alcohol-related convictions, the Driver 
License will be suspended for at least six 
months according to ORC 4511.19.
New drivers under age 18 have these restrictions:
RENEWING YOUR DRIVER LICENSE
It is your responsibility to know when your license expires. Ohio offers online Driver License renewal 
through BMV Online Services  to qualified applicants. All applicants are eligible to renew their Driver 
License in person at any Deputy Registrar License Agency . 
If you are under age 21, your Ohio Driver License expires on your 21st birthday and must be renewed in 
person.
You can renew your license up to 30 days before your 21st birthday. Qualified applicants who are age 21 
or older but not yet age 65, have the option to purchase an 8-year license, otherwise, a 4-year license is 
issued. 
There is no grace period for renewing your license. If you continue to drive after your license has expired, 
you risk a traffic citation. 
DRIVER LICENSE CLASSES
Class D Operator’s License 
A Class D operator’s license allows an individual, including a probationary driver under the age of 18, 
to operate a motor vehicle that does not require a Commercial Driver License (CDL) or an additional 
endorsement.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 12:  Purchase Y our Driver License
48
Commercial Driver License (CDL)   
A CDL is required for operators of vehicles described in the classes below, unless the operator qualifies 
for an exemption.
Class A –  Any combination of vehicles with a combined gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds 
or more, if the gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being towed is in excess of 10,000 
pounds.
Class B –  Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more or any such 
vehicle towing a vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating not in excess of 10,000 pounds.
Class C –  Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles not considered Class A or Class B and any one or 
more of the following:
• Designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver.
• Transporting hazardous materials in an amount requiring placarding.
• Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of less than 26,001 pounds and designed to 
transport fewer than 16 passengers, including the driver.
For more information on a Commercial Driver License, please see the                                                                        
Ohio Commercial Driver License Manual.
Motorcycle, Motor Scooter, or Moped License or Endorsement
Mopeds  —  Individuals age 14 or older can apply for a moped license. A moped license is not needed if a 
Driver License has already been issued.
• Applicants must meet vision standards and pass the knowledge and skills tests to obtain a moped 
license.
• The moped skills test uses the first two parts of the two-wheel motorcycle skills test (1 - Cone Weave, 
Normal Stop and 2 - Turning from a Stop, U-turn). Refer to the Motorcycle Operator Manual  for testing 
information and diagrams.
• Probationary moped license holders ages 14-15 are limited to daylight driving only.
A moped or motorized bicycle  requires a moped license or a Class D license to operate, 
and is identified by these characteristics:
• Two tandem wheels, or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear
• Capable of being pedaled
• Equipped with a helper motor 
– not more than 50 cc 
– produces no more than one brake horsepower
– capable of propelling the vehicle no greater than 20 mph on a level surface
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 12:  Purchase Y our Driver License
49
Motorcycles and Motor Scooters  — Any person operating a motorcycle (to include 2-wheeled, 
3-wheeled, and cab-enclosed cycles) or motor scooter on public roadways in Ohio must hold a valid mo-
torcycle/scooter license or endorsement. A rider may apply for a motorcycle-only license or add a motor-
cycle endorsement to a valid Ohio Driver License. 
• A two-wheeled motorcycle endorsement or license holder may operate a two- or three-wheeled 
motorcycle and a scooter. 
• A three-wheeled motorcycle endorsement or license holder is restricted to the operation of a three-
wheeled motorcycle. 
• A motor scooter endorsement or license holder is restricted to the operation of a motor scooter. 
A motor scooter or motor-driven scooter  requires a motor scooter or motorcycle license  or 
endorsement  to operate, and has these characteristics:
• Designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground
• A seat for the driver and floor pad for the driver’s feet
• Equipped with a motor between 50 cc and 100 cc that:
– produces no more than five brake horsepower 
– is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed greater than 20 mph on a level surface
A motorcycle requires a motorcycle license or endorsement to operate, and has these 
characteristics:
• Motor vehicle with motive power 
• A seat or saddle for the use of the operator
• Designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground
• No occupant compartment top or an occupant compartment top that can be installed
or removed by the user
Motorcycle Ohio Program — The Ohio Department of Public Safety’s Motorcycle Ohio program offers 
motorcycle safety and education courses at locations across the state. The Motorcycle Ohio program 
is required for individuals under age 18 before they can apply for a motorcycle operator’s endorsement 
and/or license. In addition, individuals under age 18 still must meet probationary driver license 
requirements before receiving a motorcycle endorsement. 
For more information on operating a motorcycle in Ohio visit  
and view the Motorcycle Operator Manual.
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 12:  Purchase Y our Driver License
50
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
NEW OHIO RESIDENTS - WELCOME TO OHIO!
In Ohio, once you are employed, sign a lease, buy a home, or enroll children in 
school, you are a resident.
• Within 30 days of establishing residency, Ohio drivers must have an Ohio-
issued Driver License. 
• If you own a vehicle, it must have an Ohio-issued certificate of title and 
registration. Upon registering a vehicle, Ohio-issued license plates and a 
registration sticker are provided. 
For detailed information, visit the New Ohio Residents  page of the BMV website.
SAVE OUR SIGHT FUND
When Ohioans apply for or renew their vehicle registration, they are asked if they want to contribute $1 
to the Save Our Sight fund.
The purpose of the Save Our Sight Program is to ensure that children in Ohio have good vision and 
healthy eyes. This is accomplished through an established grant process. Recipients of the grant provide 
vision services in all counties of the state.
ORGAN DONOR REGISTRY AND THE SECOND CHANCE TRUST FUND 
Ohio law allows TIPIC, Driver License, ID card, and vehicle registration applicants to voluntarily register 
as an organ, eye, and tissue donors in the Ohio Donor Registry. At the time of issuance, Ohioans are 
asked if they want to be a registered organ, eye, and tissue donor. When an Ohio credential is issued, the 
term “ORGAN DONOR” is printed on the card. You also may enroll online at the Donate Life Ohio website 
or through BMV Online Services . 
A voluntary donation to Ohio’s Second Chance Trust Fund supports education of organ, eye, and tissue 
donation.
VOTER REGISTRATION
All Driver License and ID card applicants who qualify are asked if they would like to register to vote or 
change their voter status. Voter status can be changed at any Deputy Registrar License Agency by filling 
out a Voter Registration/Change of Address Form. The Deputy Registrar will send completed voter forms 
to the County Board of Elections.
ID R KIDS
Ohio photo ID cards for children assist authorities in the event that a child becomes lost or is reported 
missing. An Ohio ID card is used for identification purposes only, and cannot be used for anything else, 
including driving privileges.
You may apply for an Ohio ID card for your child at any Deputy Registrar License Agency and provide 
identity documents from the Acceptable Documents List . Visit the BMV website for more information 
about the ID R Kids campaign . 
IN SECTION 13:
• NEW OHIO RESIDENTS
• SAVE OUR SIGHT FUND
• ORGAN DONOR REGISTRY/
SECOND CHANCE TRUST FUND
• VOTER REGISTRATION
• ID R KIDS
• NEXT OF KIN – EMERGENCY 
CONTACT INFORMATION
• LIVING WILL DESIGNATION
•  ARMED FORCES DESIGNATION
SECTION 13:  What Else Should I Know?
51
NEXT OF KIN – EMERGENCY CONTACT INFORMATION
Through the Next of Kin Emergency Contact Information program, Ohioans can identify up to two 
emergency contacts for law enforcement to notify when an accident or emergency leaves the person 
unable to communicate with law enforcement or emergency medical responders. Parents of children 
who have an Ohio ID card may add contact information to their child’s record for use in the event the 
child becomes lost or is reported missing. 
Add emergency contact information to your driver record or identification card record:  
• Online:   BMV Online Services
• In Person:   At any Deputy Registrar License Agency
• By Mail:  BMV Verification Services
  Document Management
  P.O. Box 16520
  Columbus, OH  43216-6520  
LIVING WILL DESIGNATION
Ohio Driver License and ID card applicants are asked if they want their Driver License or 
ID card to indicate that they have executed a valid power of attorney for health care or 
a declaration for the use of life-sustaining equipment. The indication will display on the 
back of the Driver License or ID card.
ARMED FORCES DESIGNATION
Any veteran, active duty, or reservist of the Armed Forces of the United States may have the ‘ARMED 
FORCES’ designation display on the Ohio Driver License or ID card.
Applicants may visit any Deputy Registrar License Agency and present their Ohio Driver License or ID 
card and one of the following:
• DD214
• Active or Retired Military ID Card
• Veteran Identification Card
• Copy of current orders
OHIO DRIVER MANUAL
SECTION 13:  What Else Should I Know?
HSY 7607 10/25
